+++
title = "Layoffs"
description = "Rant about state of economy"
in_search_index = false
date = 2023-12-24

[taxonomies]
tags = ["rant"]
+++

In this month I would have got temporarily laid off if it was not for dumb luck.
<!-- more -->
Layoffs are extremely common at the moment, the US is showing signs that [layoffs are slowing down][1], but the EU seems to be lagging behind.
As I am entering this situation, it is hard not to feel worried.
I am drifting in the ocean of the job market.
I have no idea what my learning goals should target.
The progress of ML and AI is on a rocket, seemingly impossible to chase.
There is no way that I can be in pace with this space race.

With the advent of AI around the corner, LLM are poised to bring about many big changes, and it makes me so uncertain about what I should do.
One study found that GitHub Copilot could excel [developers to complete tasks 55.8% faster][2].
Do I throw away everything that I have learnt to focus solely on learning ML and getting a career in this field?
The general advice from people seems to be not to chase the current trends but to focus on yourself.
But has not being rigid been the downfall of many companies, e.g. Nokia, or Kodak?

For four months, I intensively applied for jobs, holding almost 2–3 interviews every week.
I even searched for jobs outside of Finland, applying in Sweden and Germany.
The automotive industry seems especially tough, even though my last two projects were with automotive clients, it has not prepared me enough to continue working there.
{{ img(path="/diagrams/interview.svg", alt="Over 70 jobs applied, 20 past first stage interviews, all rejected", caption="Number of interviews taken in EU, last quarter 2023.") }}

In many cases I felt the interview focused on the wrong things.
Why is it necessary to remember Big O notation of common containers in C++?
This type of information is only three clicks away, therefore I can make a decision on the fly as to which container I need to use, such as:
1. Open Firefox
2. Enter in search bar: `C++ containers site cppreference`
3. Read the page to see which requirements match the required containers...

Does an expert need to remember these containers and their properties?
There are so many different containers depending on what framework you are working with, e.g.
Qt, Boost, and C++, they all have their own containers, so why should I commit these type of things to memory?
I feel that a better interview would have been to describe a container and calculate the Big O, which indicates problem-solving skills.

In another interview, my technical skills were not the most relevant topic.
Instead, I was questioned on the software development process, especially around factory process.
In this case I did not have enough knowledge and I started to fumble, but I completely accept that as my lack of skills.
It was quite clear to me that I lacked the experience for this position, but the majority of interviews were not like this.

I have many interests, but I have not been able to pursue any of them professionally...
I am compelled hard to think about what my career should be, and whether my skills would be relevant in the future as well...
Not only that, but should not one aspire to find [ikigai][3]?
When facing constant rejection, it is hard to think that I will find ikigai working for another company.
All this time spent job hunting also makes me think, what I could have accomplished if I had just focused on myself, rather than focused on securing an income.
At the same time I am wondering whether I should take on the risk that comes with entrepreneurship.
If I do want to pursue a career with a company, then how do I keep my skills relevant?

I enjoyed my time at universities a lot, I would not change any of it.
I met great people, learnt a lot, and appreciate everyone that I got to interact with.
University was one of the best experience I could have ever got.
I always look back at this time with great fondness.
Although I did not complete my M.Sc. (just 2.5 ECTS credits left out of 120), it was still great as I got to learn exactly what I wanted.
Maybe I should go back to academia? 🤔

I derive my enjoyment from solving technical problems, and configuring systems.
Unfortunately, generalizing like I have, does not seem to lead me to any senior career paths in the current market.
In the end, I got lucky by the connections that I have built.
I had applied individually for a position at this one company, but did not look relevant for the job by the recruiter's eyes.
A month later, a colleague of mine reached out to me regarding the same position, and then they manage to sell me to this same position.
So what I have learned from applying to jobs is that:
* This Finnish tech industry is quite small, and people know each other.
This is quite different from UK or the USA, put time and effort in your applications.
* Try to reach out to recruiters, do not just send your CV and be done with it.
You can also ask for feedback on your application, remember to do this whilst it is fresh in the recruiters mind.
* Practise solving algorithms tasks in the language the jobs are.
This will allow you to get past the first stages.
* Having an open portfolio with some projects helps a little in making you stand out from other candidates.
* Believe in yourself, even though the situation may seem dire, you will eventually get lucky.

Anyway, rant is over, I hope 2024 will be better for us all.

[1]: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-08-16/tech-firms-are-slowing-layoffs-but-still-not-yet-resuming-hiring
[2]: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06590
[3]: https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20170807-ikigai-a-japanese-concept-to-improve-work-and-life 
